[Music]
let's concentrate now on the impact of
all of this because travel first Simon
is here Jeannie is still with me so too
is Jake
Simon let's start with Donald Trump's
travel ban that we've seen introduced
that it's going to affect huge numbers
isn't it let alone the practicalities of
all of it well it's totally
unprecedented to have travel
restrictions in this way across the
Atlantic it has stunned the airlines
they weren't expecting this and that's
because of the numbers involved so let's
have a look at those first of all
because the number of flights per day
between Europe and the United States
affected are 270 that's seventy nine
thousand nine hundred seats per day and
remember this travel ban that President
Trump is bringing in is lasting 30 days
so over that period you're talking about
1.4 million seats lost for the airlines
who make money out of this and the
number of flights 5220 lost over that
period now the important thing is who's
affected and its people from the 26
Schengen countries so those European
countries that have a common travel area
and that doesn't then include the United
Kingdom and Ireland and some Eastern
European countries including Croatia for
instance so you might say well if you're
coming from the United Kingdom that's ok
and it's ok for instance for British
Airways which operates from United
Kingdom but that's not so everyone's
uncertain they don't know what's going
to happen next and the airline's
particularly are badly affected their
share prices have plummeted downwards
yes it caught the Europeans cold I was
listening to one French MP who was said
it just doesn't work like that you know
if I want to catch a flight I will now
get a train to London and then get a
flight to New York so all sorts of
practicalities to work through let me go
straight to another question though
Simon - from Karolina who's been in
touch - ask I meant to go to Berlin next
week I'm scared of a the country being
locked down and B being put into
quarantine and not being allowed back
into the UK what should I actually do
you know I've had a number of other
people asking me
the exact same question Berlin comes up
quite often because it's a popular
destination well she can't fly there for
instance from the UK there's no problem
about flying to Berlin yet but the worry
is as she says you know will my
insurance work my travel insurance if
I'm trapped there for some reason
so that's a concern will I be able to
get back will I be covered but the other
thing is for all travelers you know it's
there a point in going there are
attractions shut down now in Berlin you
can't go into the viewing area on the
Reichstag for instance so if travelers
are thinking should I go because I might
get trapped I might be out of pocket
they're also thinking should I bother
anyway and also thinks it's so fluid
they can change so quickly as we've seen
some and thank you really
let's talk about the markets because
we've seen extraordinary turmoil for
days it is inevitably hitting economies
across the country recession is being
talked about pensions all those sort of
things rolled into into the pot in terms
of consideration Jafar in Nigeria has
asked how much impact would all have on
the global economy
if this emergency continues that is
exactly the question that's got the mark
it's quite so anxious I mean what we've
seen now is the Bears are back what do I
mean by that stock markets are down by
about 20 percent from their recent peak
or more than that in some cases and you
may think so what but as you mentioned
their pensions even people who don't
invest directly in the stock markets are
going to be affected by this their
pension funds may be suffering and the
big question is how long how far how
wide how deep is the economic impact of
this going to be and there is a bit of a
trade-off going on here we had President
Trump of course talking about the fact
this wasn't a financial crisis but also
talking about shutting down those
flights now on the one hand you've got
measures which are gauged in perhaps
slowed down the human spread but that
could deepen the economic impact in the
short term if we're not travelling going
out shops and spending and the crucial
thing if governments and central banks
aren't on hand to sort of patch up the
damage that could actually extent in
terms of the markets after all we've
seen over the last few days other
markets already factoring in this going
on for considerable amount of time or is
likely to be further huge volatility
that we've seen this volatility isn't
going to end by any means I mean what
we've seen in recent days is a shift
from this expectation it was going to be
a very short sharp shock to actually
this could carry on for some months but
they're still talking about months but
the big concern is what if it goes on
even longer what if there isn't that
action from central banks and
governments which means that businesses
that can't pay the bills today don't go
under and don't start cutting jobs but
the good news and we have to remember
this is that everyone out there is
saying all the analysts have spoken to
us saying the moment we get assigned
that clarity that perhaps things are
getting better that the both the spread
and the impact of being contained
markets could spring back incredibly
rapidly so we shouldn't get too
disheartened take a quick twin thought
in terms of mortality rates around the
world why do they differ and what sort
of figures are you seeing in terms of
the people who catch coronavirus and the
amount of hospitalization that is
required which obviously puts a huge
pressure on the health systems so
mortality rates will only know the true
mortality rate how many people have died
once this outbreaks over because of the
iceberg effects so there will be people
who are infected that we just don't know
about so it's very hard to do the maths
and get an accurate figure at the moment
though their rates vary between
countries perhaps because of differences
in the way people are assessing it and
also how people are accessing care and
whether the data collection and the
outcomes are known for the patients at
the time the big concern it's not just
about death rates though it's about who
gets sick and who needs to go to
hospital so it comes back to those
efforts to try and slow spread and not
have one sharp peak that exceeds
healthcare capacities but try and spread
it out for a bit longer just so that
people who can get care can actually
access it which brings me to my final
question to you Jay because of course
when you look at all the different
strands all the spread of this the
number of cases the number of countries
it's it's obviously alarming but it's
worth underlining isn't it that the
majority of people who catch coronavirus
do recover it's really important and it
needs to be a balanced message so we
think 80% of those who are infected
we'll get a mild illness which is great
news but we need to come together and
remember that there are other people who
may get more severe disease and we all
need to do everything to protect those
people and stop them from getting our
infections Jake thanks very much well
times up sorry if we didn't get to your
questions many of the answers though are
on the BBC website and it's been an
information-rich 25 minutes I hope you
found it useful my thanks to dr. Jake to
Katharine Darshini
and Simon and thanks most of all for you
for watching bye for now
[Music]
you